hello and welcome to another episode of
balanced body radio i'm your host casey
ruff and today we have another amazing
guest to re-introduce you today travis
christopherson is a returning guest on
our show be sure to check out his first
appearance on episode 127 of boundless
body radio which is one of our most
downloaded of all time travis
christopherson has a degree in molecular
biology and has a master's degree in
material engineering and science he is a
full-time science writer and published
the best-selling book tripping over the
truth how the metabolic theory of cancer
is overturning one of medicine's most
entrenched paradigms which shows how the
metabolic theory of cancer is
overturning one of medicine's most
entrenched paragraphs he is also the
author of ketones the fourth fuel
warbridge to krebs to veach the 250-year
journey to find the fountain of youth he
also wrote the book we'll be discussing
today curable how an unlikely group of
radical innovators is trying to
transform our healthcare system he is
the founder of the foundation for
metabolic cancer therapies and the
co-founder of care oncology travis
christopherson what an honor it is to
welcome you back to balanced body radio
great to be back casey thanks for having
me absolutely we had such a fun
discussion last time and it really was
one of our most downloaded episodes and
we barely touched on the two books that
we did talk about and we definitely
hardly even touched it on your latest
book and so it's great to bring it back
here and be able to discuss that with
you today um as we were kind of talking
offline a little bit we were kind of
going back and forth on what we should
talk about and what you wanted to talk
about and you said specifically we can
always talk about ketones ketones is one
of my favorite topics and i think
they're mine too why
how did you become so interested in
ketones to begin with
oh man
that goes back to to tripping over the
truth when i was researching this sort
of non-standard
cancer theory the metabolic theory of
cancer and
it lead the low-hanging fruit of
therapeutics was obviously a switch away
from glucose metabolism to ketone
metabolism so that was 2014 and i just
started reading
you know the literature the publications
on the ketogenic diet and there was not
nearly as much then as there is now
if you look at a google trend surge of
ketones it just exploded around that
time
so people became very interested in it
but you know it showed such incredible
therapeutic potential for
just a wide almost
you know inconceivable amount of
maladies from traumatic brain injury to
parkinson's all neurodegeneration
and obviously cancer so it was just a
dive into those publications and then
realizing that you know it had this
malign history of being the sort of
pathological state
and then sort of around the 70s being
viewed as a sort of elegant adaptation
to starvation
and now it's you know it's really
exploded into
not only therapies but just potentially
for optimizing health and so forth but
yeah just
absolutely fascinating biochemistry the
scientific story behind it's fascinating
because of the the
characters involved in the science were
so such compelling people
so yeah it's still an ongoing
fascination there's still you know a lot
of research to be done that's amazing
you are so good in all of your books at
reading together the science and the
biology with those stories you're like
the best history teacher that i never
had like you're really good at exploring
the context and the situations and you
know
all the work of otto warburg is amazing
but under a certain context is even more
rich and dynamic you do such a good job
telling those stories i really can
appreciate that for somebody who hears
ketone and they think oh yeah i know
what that is um i saw a magazine cover
at the grocery store and i think i'm
supposed to eat a bunch of butter and
you know chug the butter my coffee and
maybe eat lots of bacon can you explain
like the difference between like what
most people may think of when they hear
keto versus what the actual molecule is
how it originates in the body and some
of the things that it does
yeah well yeah so so the way i think of
the ketogenic diet is sort of the
nutritional maintenance of the fasting
state
and and the way ketones were first
discovered is when a person just doesn't
eat for a period of time
their body really has no choice but to
start mobilizing fat
and generating ketones is a as a source
of of to replace glucose because you
burn through carbohydrates in about 24
or 36 hours and then there's
there's none left in store so your
body's faced with this crisis
and when it mobilizes fat it begins this
sort of biochemical process of burning
it called beta oxidation to do that it
cleaves off two carbon chunks
to acetyl coa that enters the cell
and then
there's a huge spillover effect of that
as acetyl coa and so there's enzymes
waiting to convert that to what we call
ketone bodies in the liver
and then those are exported in the
circulation to replace glucose
especially for the brain
which can burn up to two-thirds of of
ketones when you're in this fasted state
so it's really you know it's a
replacement for when you're when you
don't have food the ketogenic diet
just sort of as a hack to maintain that
fasted state so you just drop
carbohydrates down to to a very low
level and you up your fat and then you
stay in that you know kind of the fasted
state um
whether that's natural you know that you
you have to go back through evolutionary
history and really be able to pin down
what people ate to know if a ketogenic
diet is a natural diet that we sort of
evolved eating or not
but certainly we evolved to not eat for
periods of time
you know so so all that all that still
has to be sorted out whether maintaining
a ketogenic diet for a healthy person
over a long period of time is a good
idea or should you cycle those those
sorts of questions need to be worked out
sure yeah but but the idea that humans
can go longer than a few days without
glucose it's such a foreign concept or
at least it was for a long time uh you
mentioned the studies so we talked about
this last time are we still referring to
some of those cahill studies where he
did the 40-day fasting and showed where
the different fuel sources were coming
from and how different parts of the body
were utilizing them
you know cahill was a pioneer he was the
one that
looked at this first through the lens of
a adaptation that was beneficial to
humans not as a pathological state
and he was when you did the math on
carbohydrate metabolism nobody could
figure out how a human could not eat for
30 days so a normal weight person can go
you know easily 30 days without eating
as long as they have water and the math
didn't work out because you burned
through blood glucose too fast at that
time it was thought that the brain could
only use glucose
and so he was the first one to prove to
show that the brain switched over to the
this sort of
um it had this hybrid capacity to switch
over to ketone bodies and that solved
the dilemma of how can a person go so
long without eating the longest fast
ever was a guy
he went i think a year and 11 days
you know he had plenty of uh fuel to
start with i think he weighed 400 pounds
when he started but he was fine you know
they gave him some electrolytes and
supplements but but he was fine for over
a year without food
wow that's incredible i can say just
anecdotally well i had a client once
that would do extended fast during the
week he would have his last meal on
sunday and he literally would just have
coffee in the mornings and wouldn't eat
again until friday and i trained him on
tuesdays and fridays and he would come
into the gym hungry on tuesday he would
not be hungry on friday and dude i kid
you not he would pee our deadlifts on
friday he felt great
you wouldn't think that would be
possible it's incredible yeah you know
it's it's interesting my son he's a he's
a sprint athlete yeah deadlift same
thing so he's a push athlete for about
the usa bobsled team
and these guys are
if you're gonna go to the far end of the
spectrum of athletes they're the
dragsters you know they're just designed
to sprint for 15 30 meters as fast as
you can carrying a load
and um
you know in a fasted state there's
plenty of blood glucose there to make
and you know if you're taking creatine
and you have enough phosphate energy you
can explode like that so it's not a
detriment to i don't think it's a
detriment at all to those sort of spring
activities yeah that's awesome i also
know somebody in
england who just completed some five
days of cycling where they were doing
like at least 100k every single day and
they did the whole thing faster and i
know they documented a lot of their
health metrics and numbers and just
you're right like sprinting you wouldn't
even think you could be able to do that
sprinting with no you know quote-unquote
fuel we can i just think we so much
under-appreciate what our bodies can do
with so little inputs it can just kind
of sort things out itself
yeah we're incredibly adaptive yeah
that's that's a good and tweakable it's
it's always amazing to me like even
taking certain
supplements or things like that you can
dramatically change
just the physiology and biochemistry
that's going on in the body and it's got
an amazing recovery capacity
bounce back from insults you know it's
it's we don't give it enough credit it's
an incredible machine
yeah one of the i totally agree one of
the cool things from the cahill studies
that i you know really didn't appreciate
at first was the gluconeogenesis that
happens in the body i think that most
people would think like okay i don't
have carbohydrate fuel so i need it from
somewhere so now i'm going to ramp up my
gluconeogenesis my body is just going to
start removing muscle tissue like
gangbusters to turn it into sugar but
the thing i didn't appreciate was as
your body is reducing its need for sugar
then the need of gluconeogenesis reduces
so low that it can get it from other
sources besides muscle you can
absolutely maintain muscle mass in an
extended fast just fine oh yeah yeah
yeah ketones are you know they always
say muscle sparing which i think is sort
of a
funny thing to say because glucose is
muscle sparing right anything you can
burn beyond protein is muscle sparing
but
you the way your body patch patchworks
together the metabolism to replace blood
glucose when you don't have carbs
there's all kinds of pathways it's not
just gluconeogenesis for example a bear
that hibernates
right they don't need as much glucose
because their brains are not as big
humans are special because we have this
huge metabolic sync our brains it cost
us 20 of our basal metabolism so it's a
big problem for us when we don't eat and
but what bears can do is just by burning
the fat they've stored when when you it
comes at triglycerides you cleave off
the glycerol molecule three carbon they
can use that glycerol to make glucose so
they never even need to to you know use
protein for gluconeogenesis to replace
glucose we do that we do all sorts of
alternative pathways to replace the
blood glucose so it's not necessarily
just that you know the gluconeogenesis
from protein that's
feeding it
such a great point that's fascinating
we've already mentioned cancer we talked
quite a bit about cancer last time but
just to reiterate how how beneficial are
ketones in
the cancer treatment world and what have
we learned even more recently about that
it's still an ongoing thing casey and
you know what's frustrating is the
clinical trials are so hard to do
because there's no money to be made you
know you there's no drug patentable drug
so you got to rely on foundations or
when the nih is feeling sort of
philanthropic but
um
it's when you look at what happens so
cancer cell has
an insatiable appetite for glucose we
know that
that's what a pet scan is a pet scan is
radio labeled glucose and you can
visualize tumors that way you inject
somebody with
radio-label glucose and the tumor cells
preferentially take it up and trap it in
the cell
so the key the idea behind the ketogenic
diet is you bring down blood glucose you
replace it with with a ketone body which
has to be burned in the mitochondrion we
know that cancer cells have impaired
mitochondrial function
whether it's intentional by the cancer
cell or is damaged that's still an
ongoing debate but we know that they
don't like to burn ketones as much
so what you get
is you get this this rarely happens in
pharmacology this beautiful therapeutic
differential where healthy cells have
switched over to burning ketones which
causes them to go into this regenerative
reparative state they become very robust
to insult right
and then the cancer cells are struggling
because they they're not getting enough
energy to make to fuel all their growth
and especially to mop up free radicals
they're always on this
very precarious edge dying from
oxidative stress and that's what
radiation and chemo is it's oxidative
stress so you set them up you set up the
cancer cells to die easier and healthy
cells to
go through insulin more so when you put
have somebody in that state and then you
give them chemotherapy or radiation you
see a more dramatic effect you see a
more therapeutic effect but you also see
a huge reduction in in side effects
so when someone's on chemo you you can
measure a number of times they vomit
that can go from seven a day literally
to zero when someone's in a fasted
ketogenic state
hair growth mouth sores all the things
you can count go down and the subjective
things like fatigue and things like that
so i think that's where it's got a real
potential is just
you know i envision in the future
there'll be three branches of oncology
there'll be radiation
um
meta uh uh medical oncology which is
chemo drugs and metabolic and so you'll
have somebody put people in this state
before they get standard care
and it's it's moving in that direction
they're noticing all kinds of drugs work
better on the ketogenic diet you know at
major cancer institutions we're trying
to fund a trial the ketogenic diet on
glioblastoma alongside can standard care
cedar cyanide so i think within you know
if you have me on again in five years i
think it'll be a much different
landscape i really hope so
i really really hope so yeah i mean
incurable which we're going to talk
about here in a second but infuriable
you make the case that like we're
diagnosing more cancer now
but we're not changing the survival
rates like what is going on with that
and you know i asked you this question i
love asking people who do the research
this question what would you do if
somebody gave you the diagnosis knowing
everything you know what would you do
and most of us can sit around and we can
theorize what we might do but we don't
actually maybe know what we would choose
in that state we've hosted uh martha
tettenborn on our show who who was given
a cancer diagnosis and she was a
registered nurse and she did the
research herself and so she learned that
if she was on mostly like very strict
keto during the procedure and then when
they traveled to i want to say toronto
to get the treatments done she would do
48 hours fasted before the treatment 24
hours after full fast she was a little
tired she never got sick
she was fully functional she made all
her meals like talk about somebody who
like really had to put their money where
their mouth was and she did great and
now she's sharing that message along
you know so many other people that are
trying this of themselves that yeah
nobody's talking about this because
nobody's gonna make money on a trial but
you can do this easily for free and
whether it's gonna you know work with
cancer and you don't have to do other
treatments it's kind of controversial
but at least it will be helpful
right yeah
yeah i would do a number of those things
and i always have to preface that with
you know
every case is individual so if somebody
wanted to fast before chemo
they they would need to have a medical
workup because if they're late stages of
cachexia you know they may not be able
to lose weight and maybe detrimental so
always work with with other people but
yeah for me
i
when you look at medicine
it's always done through the lens of
risk reward
so i look at a ketogenic diet as
extraordinarily low risk and that's
already been proven it's very safe in
the cancer setting under withheld people
that are you know in a decent
functional state
and and so why not why wouldn't you do
that i would look at all you know the
under the repurposed drugs that we know
are safe that have anti-cancer activity
combinations of those
there's some nutraceuticals that have
incredible early data like luteolin
epigenin those kind of kind of things um
so
i just i couldn't ima you know i think
doctors probably do
when it happens to them
way more than they would recommend to
patients under most settings
so i you know i i look at from that end
of risk reward i would just do all the
combinations of all those things i could
yeah why not it also when you think of
the cancer problem it always leads to
well how do you not get cancer in the
first place right
how do you prevent it from happening and
that that's
where i think a ketogenic diet could
or or fat intermittent fasting whatever
you know is deter proven to work could
have a huge role to play because
one of the most astounding aspects of
being in ketosis
is you get this dramatic
ability to to antioxidant effect so we
get an up regulation of all these
enzymes that quench free radicals like
superoxide dismutase catalase which you
also get this huge
increase in glutathione the ability of
glutathione to mop up free radicals free
radicals we know break dna
dna can trigger cancer whether it's
usually it's not the genetic mutation
itself it can be it's a combination of
mutations but that triggers a whole
series of other epigenetic things that
can lead to cancer
in ketosis prevents free radicals which
prevents dna breaks
so so you know that may be
one way to just not get cancer in the
first or at least reduce the probability
of getting cancer in the first place
sure or make it move slower so that yeah
maybe you do have cancer but it's not
going to advance before you're going to
pass away of natural causes anyway it's
so interesting there's just so many
benefits on so many levels it's like if
we look at it as like you're going to go
on the ketogenic diet or be in ketosis
but it really seems more like no we have
a real lack of ketosis in our natural
lives because of all the crap that we've
set up for ourselves
yeah i couldn't agree that lying in the
new york times article that gary taubes
wrote i think in 2004 or 2006 maybe
richard beach was quoted as saying
the natural state of mankind is to
starve occasionally
and that's that's a huge question
have we stepped that far out of our
natural physiology
that we're we're
way more sickly than we should be right
should we have cancer rates like this
because we don't see those in the wild
with animals so we've stepped out of
this biological niche that is
conducive to good health
into this new era you know that probably
happened about 12 000 years ago with
modern agriculture when we just
drastically shifted our diet and and
then became very indolent you know desk
jobs we solved energy problems we didn't
have to chop wood anymore
so it's a sort of collision of lifestyle
events that led us to this what i would
call an unnatural stain yeah i think
when you look at the benefits of ketosis
so far in the literature from
neurodegeneration to diabetes to you
know you just go down to every almost
every chronic disease right that that's
the biggest burden in the health care
system
so yeah it begs the question is
how can something be that beneficial
if it's not something that's
evolutionary baked in to be this
therapeutic effect
yeah yeah great great point it's so
ironic that technology is what makes us
human you know banging two rocks
together to make a tool makes us human
yet that same technology comes back to
bite us to be asked
12 000 years ago
solve one problem and create another
that's really good with that we're good
at that and selling it to you making
some money
which is a great segue into curable what
an amazing book i i've really enjoyed
listening to it um let's talk about
you writing the book and how you came to
this idea but first of all can you
explain what a crappy baseball team from
20 years ago has to do with berkshire
hathaway has to do with our medical
system
you know i wish i would have shortened
that intro a little bit because it's i i
was making too many points at once but
yeah
the oakland a's it's funny because my
dad my dad's business partner for 20
years was the second baseman for the
oakland a's when they won those three
world series
the reggie jackson they won the in the
early 70s won three world series in a
row so i always liked the oakland a's
but then and then the movie moneyball
came out
and it's just a perfect example you know
the book is about
the book i would say the book really is
about when you look at a chart there's a
really
just eye-popping graph and the world and
data
website where it shows
the life expectancy of like 15 developed
countries so european countries and
us
and australia all what we call develop
advanced economies
and we are dead last in lifespan and
spend by far more than anybody per
capita in healthcare
so the question is okay from that chart
what are we doing wrong you know
we're doing something drastically wrong
and then
the the segway to that is well
you know medicine was always practiced
under this ethos of autonomy physician
instinct was always the coveted thing
and there's a quote by hippocrates
that a physician's instinct matters more
than any external measurement and that
ethos is carried on until today where we
rely we count on doctors to be the sort
of sovereign islands
of of
uh you know making these incredibly hard
decisions under clouds of uncertainty
and we just do not use data like we
should in healthcare and so the oakland
a's were a perfect example of that they
were they have an extraordinarily low
budget like three times lower than the
new york yankees they're at the bottom
of the list but somehow they win all the
time and and the way they do it is they
they sidestep all the human biases that
come with picking players so most teams
will use talent scouts
and they'll they'll
pick players based on flawed
instinct right if you cut through that
with data you can find these mispriced
gem players that that don't look those
town scouts hate they might be you know
short just not look like athletes or
whatever but the data screams that
they're good baseball players so yeah
when when billy bean took over and
started using data to pick players every
player that ran out was based on a
mathematical formula right and they
started they just were incredibly good
for their budget and that would that's a
model for what we could do for health
care if we did it right is just start
using data way better
and relying less on human instinct
yeah you have another sports reference
jeremy lin which i think was a really
good um thing that people would probably
remember with lynn's sanity like 10
years ago who who is this guy where did
he come from he doesn't exactly fit the
mold of what you would expect but what
an amazing baseball player a basketball
player and and you know people knew if
you knew the masses you knew the stats
he could have been plugged in way
earlier
yeah yeah completely yeah his the bias
they had against him was they just
didn't consider asian american
players they'd never seen great asian
american players you know so the talent
scouts passed him up over and over and
then they did athletic tests he was
incredibly athletic explosive
you know acceleration vertical jump
everything but he just had this
intangible quality
of passing and and making his team
better that you really can't
instinctually see
but the data you know was able to
uncover that and find i think it was a
houston rockets they adopted a muddy
ball like sort of methodology to picking
players and they i think they actually
passed him up and but even though the
data said it was great they still let
their biases you know take over and
passed over him and yeah then he went on
to lynn sanity and
he was incredible
wow yeah that's such a good point i'm
glad you included that in the book um
those days were really fun it was fun to
follow him back then
does he even still play i don't even
know
i don't know if he does or not that's a
good question yeah i'm sorry well that
leads us to the question like how good
are we at making decisions
well yeah that goes back to you know all
the sort of foundation of most social
sciences that were good at it right
economics
um psychology forever thought that
humans were rational creatures and
usually made rational decisions but then
these two israeli economists came up our
psychologists came along
and like that just doesn't ring true to
us so they started really studying it
and they just
in situation after situation they were
able to prove how flawed our thinking is
at like for example
they would use college students they
were both professors
and they would
ask their class say a hundred college
students the price of something they
didn't know for example wine
no one had a clue what this bottle of
wine should cost but before they had
them guess what the price should be they
had them write down the two
the last digits of their social security
number
the the group of students that had
higher
digits last two digits invariably
answered with a higher number so that's
called the um what is that one called
that's called the anchoring bias so once
you anchor your thinking to a higher
number in this case
your subsequent decisions are are you
know biased by that anchor
and you know just one example of that
after the other where our logic is just
incredibly thought flawed in our
thinking and a good example in the
healthcare field with that is
in the 1980s there was two treatments
for lung cancer there was surgery and
radiation
and surgery came on
came with a much better survival rate
but if the doctor said
okay
surgery has a better survival rate but
it comes with the 10 percent chance of
death only about 50 percent of the
people chose surgery over radiation if
the doctor said surgery has a better
survival rate but it comes with a 90
chance of survival then 80 of the
patients chose surgery so it's a pure
you know that situation life and death
is purely
should be purely
completely objective and statistical but
just based on that framing how the
doctor framed it people would have
make wildly different decisions
that part really surprised me i couldn't
believe the difference in those two
things
you just said exactly the same thing but
worded it differently put it in a
different perspective and the numbers
that you see it's so vast did that
surprise you as well
oh it's crazy yeah and that that goes to
what you're talking about earlier that
we were much better at diagnosing cancer
right
and so what like for example thyroid
cancer were way better at diagnosing it
but the death rates haven't changed
so so what happens is you get what
happens is you will have
you will now tell somebody that they
might have cancer and you'll yield that
word use that word now they're terrified
and if you have cancer you want to treat
it so that will demand treatment in
there's a lot of cases where the you
know these cancers are benign slow
growing they don't that don't represent
a real
health i mean mortality risk at that
point once you say that word cancer
you put people in the state of mind
where they almost demand treatment so we
horribly over treat now with
chemotherapy surgery surgery radiation
just because we you know the way it's
framed
and so we need you just it's incredibly
complex but you need to somehow train
doctors to walk that back and and
you know
that this represents how hard the
problem is
sure is this also a result of our
diagnostic tools getting so much better
we're able to pick up trace amounts of
things that we wouldn't have bothered
with in the past is that part of it
yeah yeah more people get screening and
we're better at screening
and you know this new age of blood
biopsies is coming along where it take a
simple blood draw and they'll be able to
tell you with some probability whether
you have cancer or not
which rep that that opens up a whole
question of of you know will this be a
net benefit to society because you're
going to be telling people they have
cancer and when some kid you're going to
get false positives no matter what
that's just the nature of any test
so that that remains to be worked out
but yeah the diagnostics is getting
incredibly good
yeah is prostate cancer another good
example of a slow-moving cancer for most
people that's like
yeah we could maybe do an operation at
age 70
or we you know we'll be better off just
letting it right
yeah completely yeah yeah prostate
cancer
like i i think you probably remember the
book charlie munger um
he just marks off the ps8 he's he's 90 i
think he's 98. his doctor tries to test
for ph ps uh
sorry prostate specific antigen psa
every time he goes in but he just
crosses it off he says why do you do
that charlie goes because i don't want
to give you the opportunity to do
anything dumb
that's right most most men will have
some degree of prostate cancer when
they're older but it probably won't kill
them so now you open the door
you know if you suspect it's there you
surgeons may want to operate
they may want to give drugs and prostate
cancer is a perfect example there's five
treatments for prostate cancer
there's watch in weight based on a psa
diagnosis watch and weight surgery and
then three different forms of radiation
from
the cheapest form a middle range form to
the highest form which is uh proton beam
therapy which is i think about 120 000
dollars
the the problem is not one of those five
therapies has been proven to be better
than the other so watching weight cost
about maybe 2 000 and just sort of
advanced surveillance checking more
where the proton beam is 120 and
you look at the data and you can see
which one's getting prescribed more and
more it's the most expensive one wow so
that's another flaw in the system is as
we incentivize doctors through the fee
for service to charge more right so you
get this over treatment problem
wow and it's such a systemic issue i was
so surprised also to hear the numbers of
you know similar demographics different
hospital systems you would think you
know maybe incentivized by the same
thing and they probably are but it's a
systemic issue where if you're in one
system like you might be more
entrepreneurial minded and you might be
pushing those things a little bit more
so you can make more money where other
people might just think they're doing
the very best thing
it would be so hard to be you know
totally entrenched in whatever everybody
else is doing around you
the variation in treatment is
frightening
so so you can measure that very well
just how different doctors treat the
same ailment so for example you can
drive there's two towns in ohio one
cincinnati and then some smaller towns
50 miles away
you're two times more likely to get a
stent put in in that small town for the
same diagnosis there's a 15-fold
difference in back surgeries between
different counties in washington
it's it i mean some doctors in the
primary care setting will order two
times the amount of mris as another
doctor the same
in the same clinic so the variation in
treatment is is crazy and you know that
that just means that there's
it's a zero-sum game there's one right
answer in those each medical thing
and they're not so you're just not
getting the right answer a lot of the
time the right the right procedure
and and it goes you know the extreme
example that was read in california
where there was a heart institute
where they were just operating on
everybody that walked through the door
if you showed any minuscule even hint of
blockage they would put you on the
operating table
and so the regulators finally it was a
self
self perpetuating thing because their
statistical data went up because they're
operating on healthier and healthier
people right
four healthy 40 year olds were getting
an operation so their mortality day to
look good because nobody was dying
they're operating on healthy people most
of the time
and so they thought they were doing the
right thing and when the regulators came
in they just put the hammer down they
thought it was just purely a money grab
these guys were doing this just to
capture money but then the reporters
came in and they realized these guys
genuinely thought they were doing the
right thing one of the staff there flew
his mom in from chicago to have her
operated on that's how you know they
were just fervently believed they were
doing the right thing so yeah you get
this
psychological ratcheting effect
peer-to-peer
where it can just go really really bad
really wrong
sure
to me that goes back to the
decision-making process and you think
like okay i'm sitting in front of a
doctor he went to school for eight years
really smart guy he's going to be able
to make the right decision can you maybe
explain some of the complexities that
these doctors have to deal with even
just in the number of
prescriptions they can write
oh it's yeah doc and that's the problem
is we count on them we sort of you know
we put them on this pedestal
that they that they're going to make the
right decision but their their job is
just destined to they're destined to
fail in that situation because medicine
is just too complex
most of it is
operating in uncertain situations all
the time you know it was always
tradition
very thin evidence to take out to
surgically remove kidneys for advanced
kidney cancer then they finally did the
trial
and show that there was no benefit to
that over the chemotherapy alone but
they you know they were doing both and
and just based on
more tradition than anything so those
are the societies we need to remove that
uncertainty for doctors so we need just
a better marriage between the ability to
capture that data to do those trials to
provide those guard rails for doctors
you know to to make better clinical
decisions and that doesn't mean you have
to get rid of the
the intuition doctors have because that
can be magical too
you know there's there's many cases
where doctors just based on intuition
and years of experience didn't have done
incredible things so you don't want to
remove that but you want to provide
these guard rails to sort of
you know keep them from
these incredibly hard decisions to keep
them sort of guided down the right path
yeah i you and i were talking a little
bit offline and it kind of reminds me of
the airline industry and like how many
billions of people fly all over the
world without anything happen like
magically 550 miles an hour at 35 000
feet they don't die
ever like planes don't crash very often
and it's it's remarkable and even when
things go wrong
pilots can make really good decisions
when it comes down to it but and they
still have that creativity to be able to
do that but
you're mentioning guardrails like
there's so many guardrails and
checklists all these things you have to
do to be able to put that chunk of metal
in the air carrying 200 people like why
can't it be more like that
yeah yeah you know
when i mow my lawn i'm very aware that
my mo my motor can stop at any minute
just quit running i always think of that
when i'm an airplane how does this thing
just never how does it always work
you said checklist and that's you know
the airline industry has gotten so good
whenever there's a problem they build in
a redundant safety system so they've
just
checked off anything that can go wrong
over the decades to this point of almost
perfection
and and we did that i can't remember the
year but they did that they did a
clinical trial where they instituted
surgical checklists right just to
eliminate human error make sure you give
the antibiotics before surgery make sure
you have to check it off to eliminate
the doctors from forgetting the
mortality rates dropped by 40 percent
so so
without those you know those checklists
those those those things that govern
the our ability you know the because
we're going to make mistakes the things
that govern those without those there
you're just going to continue to have
those sorts of problems and we just we
don't do that well at all in medicine
wow that's absolutely crazy we talked a
little bit about uh patentable drugs i
thought this was fascinating and i knew
that there was there were certain things
that would happen if you wanted to
patent a drug and how the
pharmaceuticals have those you know what
is it 10 or 15 years that they can make
a ton of money before they lose the
patent and basically anybody can copy it
and the
the pills prescription can become
generic can you talk a little bit about
that and what issues um
arise from that problem
yeah yeah
yeah so that that's you're right so
that's the process right we go through
all these phase one phase two phase
three it takes decades
billions of dollars sometimes and then
we the fda will approve a drug for that
indication
so so let's use metformin as an example
they went through that process got
approved for type 2 diabetes
now what happens is now it's prescribed
throughout the population in mass so you
get now you get decades of clinical data
of it being prescribed in this disease
population now you can discover new
things like it was noticed that there's
huge reductions in cancer rates with
type 2 diabetes that are taking
metformin
so you'll notice other things you know
other diseases that potentially be good
that has reductions in while it's being
prescribed but now because it's become a
generic there's no incentive for the
pharmaceutical company to win an
indication for that new disease so what
you do is you leave a lot of
pharmacological potential on the table
because of that they're sort of stranded
in this financial purgatory
and that's this idea of repurposing
drugs right and and metformin is is
really interesting because
it looks a lot like the ketogenic diet
you see reductions in all kinds of
diseases when people are on metformin
and
there's no incentive to study about what
we look at metformin pharmacologically
what it looks like it's doing is really
targeting the aging process
it's slowing aging down so you just get
this
reduction in chronic disease in general
and they've been trying to do a trial
called the tame trial targeting aging
through with metformin um for a long
time and the nih finally agreed to uh
classify
they couldn't kick it off because nih
wouldn't consider aging a disease and
drugs are for diseases right not not
aging so they finally reclassified it
they got the funding but then coveted
stopped
um stopped it but it should start back
up so how amazing would it be you know
it's about a
few pennies a pill it's extraordinarily
safe if you could give this to people in
their 60s slow down aging
prevent
reduce the probability of all kinds of
chronic disease
and but those kind of things just sort
of get lost by the wayside we have this
weird
sort of
methodology where we try to treat
disease once it's become entrenched in
the body instead of really really
considering how do we prevent it and
that's been
you know the overwhelming
imperative behind pharmaceutical
companies for as long as they've been
around
talk i mean perfect example is type 2
diabetes let's let you have controlled
glucose while your insulin is going
bananas for 20 years 30 years 40 years
and then only when your glucose starts
to rise oh well maybe this is a problem
we should start to deal with this like
this has been a problem for decades
yeah
have you ever talked to benjamin bickman
have you had him on your show absolutely
yeah yeah yeah
that that to me is one of the most just
crazy points in the world that you know
ben ben's big
sort of push is that we just we're not
we don't characterize type 2 by these
right way so you just said it perfectly
because insulin is rising for decades
before glucose does why don't we start
targeting those people
you know and and there's all kinds of
things you can do a ketogenic diet a
low-carb diet that's how you can target
it at that point but there's no emphasis
on that whatsoever you just wait until
they're actually sick and then we start
giving them drugs and don't tell them
what to eat that that's one of the most
black and white obviously thing you know
flawed ways that we've
healthcare has treated a disease yeah
absolutely crazy and it does come down
to money so i want to ask you just just
your opinion do you fault the the big
pharma for some of these issues it
doesn't really seem like it's it's
really their fault if they can't make
money on some of these trials
that's just kind of the system we have
is it their responsibility they don't
fault anybody yeah they're just doing
what they what they
can do within the confines right of
course there's nefarious players there's
various people in every industry right
but they're incentivized to make
incremental improvements on things they
know that can't work
so like in in the cancer setting we tip
when a drug gets approved sometimes it
might confirm one month of survival you
might be sick that whole month but
that's what you know all you get so yeah
they're incentivized to not like swing
for the fences and do things that can
really matter
and then you know you've got this
problem of them sinking a billion
dollars into a drug and they have to
recoup it so the prices are
are just crazily high
it's it's not
it it
i don't know how you fix that until you
can incentivize people to care about
prevention
and there's you know there's some decent
examples of that
where
in a primary care setting typically is
fee for service so you're getting paid
to treat sick people
right the more sick people the higher
you're going to get paid what they're
doing is they're giving doctors a bolus
of money per patient and they get to
keep that money if their patient stays
well
so now you've completely turned their
incentive structure 180 degrees now
these doctors are focused on
on diet i'm telling people how to stay
healthy and really
trying to do that instead of just
waiting until they get sick and then
making their money
yeah yeah that's it that's a really good
thought um
just with some of these little cost
options so we have you know intermittent
fasting or ketogenic diet or repurposing
drugs we already know a lot about it
it's just about like collecting data and
testing it in different ways to see if
it can be multi-purpose although that
sounds really smart we know that the you
know the supplement market for
probiotics has gone through the roof in
the last few years you seem to have a
favorite probiotic that's even less
expensive than that can you tell us your
exploration and low-cost probiotic
treatment in the form of fecal transfers
that was a good segue to that yeah yeah
that was when i
i looked at the health you know the
biggest problems it seemed in the health
care system were what we talked about
over treatment that's very easy to
measure and and the variation in
treatment and then the other one are
these low-hanging fruit things like the
checklist we talked about um
hand washing has always been a problem
how do you get doctors wash hands when
you get them to to wash their hands
regularly you see a huge drop in
infection rates
and that was one example of
this low-hanging fruit that got
dismissed for so long and what you're
talking about is a fecal transplant so
there's a problem where people get
hospital-inquired infections typically
called c-diff
colostrum difficile and
it's a horrible horrible disease it goes
into the colon and just just
you know if you can't get rid of it you
just slowly
get sicker and sicker until you die
and typically antibiotics work about 75
percent of the time the first round and
rocks and if you don't clear it at that
time the second round
is even you have less of a hope of the
clearing third round even less
so it's a terrible sort of spiral
downhill
it was back in the 50s there was a
doctor in denver
that just had and this is back to this
intuition he had a sort of an insightful
moment where he's like well
he had some patience that after surgery
after the unboxing surgery were getting
you know c dev
and he called it well what if we could
restore the balance of nature what he
meant was
restore the eco the probiotic ecosystem
in the colon so we had some nurses go to
the maternity ward and collect some
feces from i think it was from pregnant
women because he thought you know they
would be they're screened and they're
healthy
and um and then he just didn't just did
an animal with that into the patients
and they were
four of them that were sick recovered so
that was back in the 50s and no one
really veterinarians have been doing
this for quite some time but no one
really took it seriously or thought
about it
and then
it sort of cropped up there was a few
doctors doing it and then it cropped up
in the internet
and this is i in the book i focus on
this this grandma from i think it was
ohio and it was catherine duff and she
was in the late stages of a c diff
infection nothing was working she was
literally dying
and there was tens of thousands of
people doing it online at that point you
could just
download a youtube and how to do a fecal
transplant so her husband provided the
you know the feces and she did it and
she literally felt better that day
and so she was just just impassioned to
get this message out and at that time
the nih knew about this there was a
clinical trial going on
and they were comparing
people with cdf they'd give them a fecal
transplant or antibiotics in the trial
the people getting the fecal transplant
94 were cured the six percent that
weren't you just did it again they were
cured and the antibiotic group at that
point only showed a third were getting
better so they immediately stopped the
trial and gave all the other people you
know the crossover they gave them the
fecal transplant so the nih had that
data
and they were having a meeting about
what to do with the fecal transplant
and it just
got lost into this huge well we don't
know how to regulate it there could be
problems there's this vague idea that if
you took the feces from an obese person
maybe they might gain weight 10 years
later from their probi you know from
their
from their um microbiome
and so they they were going to put it
under an ion era uh irb invest
investigational review boards and an ind
status investigational drug so anytime a
doctor do that they have to go through
this litter you know three-inch thick
of paperwork to even do it
so nobody would do it it was effective
it would take like a year or something
right yeah yeah to do the ind status so
no one was going to do it they
effectively stopped it so she stood up
and spoke
and was like you know people are dying
from this today right now
and and you guys are gonna admire these
doctors and paperwork they're not gonna
be able to get this
no one cares if they gain weight 10
years from now they can sort that out
later they're going to die in a few days
and so she sort of you know led
added back in this rationality of a real
patient dealing with the problem and
then they they did
they did change the so they could get by
you know doctors could do it without
without risk of liability
at that point but this took for this
took so long and everybody knew it was a
cure but no one
no doctor wanted to be the first one
mixing poop in a blender in the office
you know and there's just there's a
mirror out of reasons why they didn't do
it but
now it's standing up pretty much
standard care they do it all there's
poop banks where they're super healthy
you can donate your poop and get paid
wow but it took forever for that that's
that to happen wow no that's amazing i
think as we were talking about the
beginning of the show like you combining
the biology and the science with the
story was so fascinating picturing that
room where this one person she's the
only person that's not involved with it
with the fda or something and she gets
up to makes this like a passion speech
on day two of two and gets a standing
ovation and revives the talk about that
that's a what a crazy cool story
yeah yeah it is that was just
that was an amazing story you know and
and
i kind of remember the evolution of it i
remember when my local hospital here was
just kind of they were one of the first
ones to kind of adopt it and say this is
legit we need to start doing this and
and i don't know if they make the pills
because now you can either take a pill
or do the enema but they were one of the
first ones to do it but it
the adoption rate was just painfully
slow so people
literally would just go to do it
yourself on youtube and learn how to do
it and
literally tens of thousands of people
were doing it a year on their own
wow and seeing those amazing results
like that day or the next day or
whatever just super quick
yeah it's crazy isn't it i mean think
about it it's just an ecosystem so you
have this one pathological back you take
antibiotics you wipe out the ecosystem
this one pathological bug takes hold
and and usually you have all those bugs
in there that keep everything in check
and some most people have some cdf but
it's kept in check by that microbiome so
it just makes absolutely you know that's
why vets were doing it because they just
have that horse sense well yeah you just
put the ecosystem back in there
and you know so
intuitively it's incredibly simple but
it just didn't it just took forever to
get it adopted
sure i think learning about the process
of fermentation with you know brewing
beer or making um you know sauerkraut or
kimchi you realize that one form of
bacteria eats the other one that eats
the other one that he eats the other one
and on down the line until you get the
one that like wow this gives it that
flavor that you really love and that the
same thing is happening in s all the
time it's so interesting i love that
yeah yeah the microbiome is like the
undiscovered country in medicine right
now there's so much to learn you know
even
even like a ketogenic diet you know was
standard to care for epilepsy for a long
time
but nobody knew how quite how it worked
the ketones were doing something strange
in the brain but we just knew it worked
right so in the 20s it was standard care
and
they did an experiment fairly recently
where they put mice in a ketogenic diet
and they had epileptic mice
they transferred the gut biome of the
mice in the ketogenic diet into the
epileptic mice and it stopped their
seizures
wow so the mechanism of action
lots of mechanisms actually go back to
the microbiome it was just so
underappreciated what was going on in
there that's amazing another thing that
in five or ten years if we talk again
hopefully we we've learned so much from
that and really pushed the ball forward
there um i love in the book also how you
talk about success stories and one of
them is in my backyard which is great
can you tell us a little bit about
intermountain and what things they're
doing right that might be different from
other systems
yeah yeah intermountain's an amazing
story so brent james there he's got a
really transformational guy
and they looked at this problem of over
treatment and variation in treatment and
you know he knew it was a massive
problem so how do you tackle it what he
would do is he'd look at their
electronic medical record system and he
would see
the massive variation in treatment for
certain things right and when he could
see that variation in treatment he knew
there was a problem he's like there's
there's
we got to narrow this down to the best
practice what is the best way to do this
so one example is
giving antibiotics before surgery so
doctors will do that to prevent surgical
infections
no one knew the best time to do it so
he'd look at the emr
some doctors were giving it two hours
post surgery some were giving it two
hours before surgery some right at the
time of surgery
so he had doctors he put him into groups
and had him you know do it at those
various times then they just tracked the
infection rate and they learned i think
it was something like an hour before
surgery or something like that was
optimal time to do it so he established
the best practice from this huge
uncertain cloud you know this variation
in treatment and he would just look
one thing after the other he would check
off the list and do that that same
process
and you know the totality of that in the
end when you look at intermountain
there's a 40 reduction in cost so if you
apply that same system it would solve
the health care crisis across the us
not only that their outcomes are so much
better than the rest of the country
heart disease everything they do
pretty much is is better
so he's just a shining example of how
you know you can approach this problem
he gets pushed back from the doctors you
know it's kind can be a terrifying place
to work you feel like people are looking
at you all the time and judging what
you're doing
but at the same time again he's
establishing those guard rails where
now you know what to do what the best
thing to do is and you can within those
guardrails use your intuition
so it's just it's a beautiful model
why could that not be repeated in every
hospital system is there something
preventing that from happening
well you know
i think it was obama he he used that
example in a speech about healthcare
which healthcare terrified him it was
the number one problem that was going to
bankrupt the u.s
by far everyone talks about social
security everything but health care is
by far the worst and he used
intermountain as an example of how we
could do it better but they're also
disjointed and fragmented in the u.s you
know we don't even use the same medical
record systems throughout the u.s so
so getting that you know
having one adopted system is really
difficult in our within our framework
because it's just so disconnected
wow that's so interesting okay so i have
a series of questions about what can be
done about this and first of all i want
to i want to know for like a schmuck
like me like i don't use the medical
system i'm not on prescriptions if i go
to the hospital it's because like you
know i hit a rock on my mountain bike
and endowed and broke my collarbone
again or something like that you know
what that's all about um what what how
should i be thinking about the issues
and how can i solve help solve he'll be
part of the solution um what things can
can that type of a person do
yeah
well i you know i approach that in the
book i looked at
this sort of institutional problem and
how we solve it then i looked at like
individuals what what matters the most
for the for an individual from staying
healthy
and
it's interesting because you you start
with the idea well
you can't do much about genetics we know
that if you're predisposed to genetic
disease you're most likely going to get
it or have a higher probability
but when you look at identical twin
studies it's a perfect proxy to measure
that
so you look they're genetic clones so
you watch them throughout their lives
they almost rare they rarely die of the
same disease
so if you get a disease with a hundred
percent what we call
coordinates which means it's 100 genetic
which is very rare both identical twins
will get it so like hunting disease is
an example
most of the other diseases have a
discordance rate like schizophrenia i
think is 50
so if one twin gets it the other twin
has a 50 chance of getting it and then
you go down from there cancer
most diseases are not genetic there's a
genetic component but it's it's
mostly nurture and what we what is
nurture well nurture is all the
lifestyle decisions you're making every
day what you eat how often do you
exercise
and now how do you measure what what
nurture variables are the most important
and there's a great study by
julianne lundstead holt where she just
looked at four million people
very different lifestyles so she
measured all the big things like smoking
exercise diet
and she measured how much those
variables matter
and you developing a disease are you
staying healthy
what she found was
the number one and number two were your
social life so the number one variable
how long you'll stay healthy
is
very close connections so family friends
people you can count on in a crisis
number two is social integration so how
how many people do you encounter
throughout the day do you you know do
you chat with people at work do you go
on a mountain bike ride with your
buddies do you have a book group or
whatever
those two far and way outstripped
anything if you were low in one of those
it was equivalent of smoking 15
cigarettes a day
right
so so that
and then why does that matter so you
look at the 22 000 genes and people that
report being very lonely
about 200 of them are very differently
expressed and they all relate to the
immune system so you're going to really
ramp up in this early acceleration phase
of immune system so in other words
they're chronically inflamed
and you get a down regulation in the
targeted adaptive immune response so
your ability to find out viruses
infections is reduced
so your immune system is always kind of
low grade turned on and then turned off
when you really need it
so that's that's how that biological
sort of feedback loop manifests in the
body
but that so that you know
how you approach that is up to you how
you know are you lonely can you you need
to get out there what do you need to do
to make it so you do not feel lonely and
again that
is not a fixed number for most people
it's just you feel lonely or not some
people are introverted and they don't
need a lot of connections to feel not
lonely
so but that you know and then i looked
at
the person all these people the super
super centenarians it's one in seven
million people will live to be 110 or
above
and they have no idea why they have
very different lifestyles but the one
commonality is social connections
throughout all those people and i looked
at the one the french lady who has the
longest lifespan ever recorded she lived
to be 122.
and you know according to most people
she probably did a lot of things wrong
she started smoking when she was 21 she
stopped when she was 117
but she did not smoke excessively she
only had one or two cigarettes after
dinner
she drank some pork wine she ate some
chocolate but what she did do is she had
an incredibly unstressed life where she
did tons of stuff outdoors played tennis
went hiking
was always
never felt her friend said she never
seemed stressed at all she always seemed
happy
she drove rode her bike around
village when she turned 100 and said
thank you to everybody that wished her
happy birthday
so the the point to that to me was
you don't need to worry too much right
again back to the body's incredible
resilient machine and in fact worrying
about it too much may be more
detrimental than having a cigarette
after dinner for example i would never
promote that but i think you know you
get the point
so yeah it's not it's not a simple
equation where do this eat this do that
it's really more nuanced it's more
artful than that you just need to live
a life that you know your grandma told
you to do get outside play with your
friends
eat whole foods that kind of thing
yeah what a beautiful message and we sit
here and try to calculate how many grams
of protein you should be eating what
your fasting window should be and it's
like we should all just probably chill
out a bit and i absolutely love that
message that's great um
you know another question would be for
somebody who is entrenched in the
medical system they're going through
for example cancer treatment do they do
they need to start doing their own
research and start pressing their
doctors on different options the way
that martha titanborn did like what
would you say to that person
absolutely yeah yeah and the studies
show that you know people that are more
proactive
um i talked to a doctor
who
he told me that he was a bioesthetician
at city of hope and he told me that
he looked at the data i think was
bladder cancer the mortality data on
just a small regional hospital and then
one of the major cancer centers where
people will go to get clinical trials or
just you know seek out because they
perceive to have better treatment they
were giving the same treatments
the exact same standard care of both
places but the mortality rates for the
cancer center the higher quality one
were way way better it almost looked
like two different diseases he said
and the question then is why and it's
those people were seeking out the best
right they were just motivated to live
more
so it's just a difference and it was a
healthy user bias you just have a vastly
different motivation a different a
different patient group
so that in itself can be healthcare just
being proactive and not feeling helpless
so yeah you you do want to
seek those things out as much as you can
get get as much information as you can
and back to the you know the lifestyle
thing there's a breast cancer study
3 000 women with breast cancer the ones
that reported to be lonely versus the
ones that had a very robust social
network
were four times more likely to die from
the disease
so that's a very intangible thing you
know just seeking support and it goes
back to
when you are stressed like that
you know stress can be very caustic
but your body can handle stress but the
way it does that is it releases
endorphins
and those endorphins are prompting you
to seek out help so if you heed that
seeking out the hell it makes you more
empathetic so you'll listen to other
people's problems too but you'll also
you know seek out that social network if
you if you prompt that signal
stress is is has zero caustic
it does not affect your health at all if
you don't it has a very profound effect
right so your body's sort of giving you
cues you know and what to do in those
situations as well wow so interesting on
that note my mom was diagnosed with
cancer in the late 90s we switched our
diet we did everything low fat so super
high carbohydrate
worst diet in hindsight but she still
made it seven and a half years and you
know a lot of treatments a lot of chemo
come and go and come and go but she
didn't make it that long and i think a
huge part of that was her religious
beliefs and her involvement in that
religion that not only gave her faith
but it gave her something to do and
something to wake up for it she was in
charge of certain activities and like i
think of that when you say the social
you know networking as being something
that's so beneficial that probably
offset a really terrible diet in some
degree i think
oh yeah well yeah think about it you
know cancer is provoked by inflammation
and if you go back to that so she's
waking up and she's you're right she's
got a reason to get up she's going to
church she's seeing these people
that and it feeds back into that
epigenetic mechanism of the immune
system where you're not you wouldn't
have that
much probability as having that
low-grade chronic inflammation and those
cytokines that promote inflammation feed
cancer they're powerful growth promoting
factors so
it all makes sense biologically right it
just it just
we just didn't appreciate that like we
used to now that we know
fascinating
last question for you magic wand your
king for day
systemically how how does the system
change
oh man
you know in an ideal world we we go
towards
the
we just there's no going back from the
data right the the revolution of data
and
machine learning and artificial
intelligence is making such inroads into
every industry more than people i think
realize it especially in the medicine
you know it's a new there's it can
diagnose
it can read radiological films better
than humans now
i mean vastly better so kids aren't
going into radiology and medicine
anymore because they see the writing on
the wall
this is slowly changing and i think
it'll get better
slowly
the the question there's a great example
of chess where
machines can beat humans in chess right
now
but the best
way to play chess is have a coupled with
a human where the human knows
the artificial intelligence program it's
playing with
it's called advanced chess so they have
people playing with their program
against other people with their program
that is better than the machine alone so
you know when the when you can add in
the human intuition
at the right time you get the best
outcome so i think
going towards that model of
intermountain where you encourage
intuition but you have those guard rails
is where we have to arrive
it's not one at the expense of the other
both can be there and both can be
helpful tools when needed
that's the point yeah and that's what
the advanced chess has shown us that
their the human component can be magical
it just can pick up subtleties and you
know the subconscious we don't even
really know that that's happening and
that's what you you know you want from
your doctor is that kind of
intuition that comes from decades and
decades of practice
but confined within what we the data can
where can guide us you know in the best
practices
wow so interesting this has been such an
interesting conversation i really really
thoroughly enjoyed talking to you if you
wouldn't mind tell the listener where
they can go to find you and connect with
you in your work
well go to twitter i'm on twitter and
direct message me or anything um i don't
post very much but i'm on there
my work we have the foundation that
that's fun we got incredibly
philanthropic people donating a lot so
we're trying to kick off that ketogenic
trial at cedar cyanide so if anyone
wants to help with that it's a
grassroots effort you know i don't think
it'll be done by the medical system it's
got to be done by the sort of the people
so we're close there's a small funding
gap we're close to getting that filled
and then where it's a phase 2 trial be
the largest trial ever in cancer in the
ketogenic diet
um yeah i can't wait for that to happen
that's amazing it's so encouraging to
hear that you are optimistic about the
future and that things may be slow but
they can change and again the one
takeaway being if all of us can just you
know for how serious and important this
is all of us can chill out a little bit
more slow our lives down a little bit
more appreciate the things that are
around us and you know maybe get a
little bit less involved in the news
cycle more involved in you know your
neighborhood the birds social life all
that kind of thing i think is a
wonderful wonderful message so thank you
travis christopherson so very much for
all of your work thank you for going out
and discovering what could have been
many many books and convincing you down
into one book and thank you for taking
the time to be on our show today we
really appreciate it oh appreciate it
thanks for having me casey absolutely
such an honor and this has been another
episode of boundless body radio